docs-next/pages/apis/access-control.mdx, before:

import { Markdown } from '../../components/Page';

# Access Control API

The `access` property of the [list configuration](./schema) and [field configuration](./fields) objects configures who can read, create, update, and delete items in your Keystone system.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({ access: { /* ... */ }, }),
      },
      access: { /* ... */ },
    }),
  }),
});
```

This document covers the complete access control API.
For a guide on how to use this API to apply common patterns please see the [access control guide](../guides/access-control).

## List Access Control

Keystone allows you to set up access control on a per-list basis.
The default access control is to allow all operations for all users.
Access control is applied to the generated CRUD (**c**reate, **r**ead, **u**pdate, **d**elete) queries and mutations in the [GraphQL API](./graphql).
Access control is applied before any [hooks](./hooks) are executed.

You can specify access control using either **concise** or **verbose** syntax.
Verbose syntax provides a separate access control rule for each operation type; `create`, `read`, `update`, and `delete`.
Concise syntax provides a single access control rule which is used for all operation types.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      // Concise access control definition
      access: true,
      // Verbose access control definition
      access: {
        create: true,
        read: true,
        update: true,
        delete: true,
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

When using verbose syntax, any operation which is not specified will default to `true`.

The examples below will all use the concise syntax, however the various access control rules can all be applied using verbose syntax.

There are three different ways you can specify access-control rules: **static**, **declarative**, and **imperative**.

### Static (list)

Static access control rules are simple boolean values.
A value of `true` indicates that all users can perform the operation.
A value of `false` indicates that no users can perform the operation.

A static value of `false` implies that the operation can never be executed.
As such, Keystone will exclude the related operations and types from the GraphQL API.
For example, if you set `{ create: false }` then the mutations `createItem` and `createItems` will be removed from the GraphQL API.
If you want to keep the operations in the GraphQL API while preventing all access, you can use the [imperative](#imperative-list) access control rule `() => false`.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      // Static access control definition
      access: true,
    }),
  }),
});
```

### Declarative (list)

Declarative access control rules are GraphQL `where` statements which are used as additional filters when looking up items as part of read, update, or delete operations.
The access control rule can be any valid clause which could be applied as a `where` filter to the list in the [GraphQL API](./graphql).

For read operations, the access control rule is merged with any other filters in the query, and only those items which match the merged filter are returned.

For update and delete operations, the access control rule is merged with the `id` value to form a filter.
For singular operations, e.g. `updateItem` or `createItem`, if the merged filter does not return an item then the mutation will return an `Access Denied` error.
For multi-item operations, e.g. `updateItems` or `createItems`, if the merged filter excludes items then these will simply be ignored by the operation, giving the same behaviour as if the ID was missing.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { checkbox } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: { isLocked: checkbox() },
      // Declarative access control definition
      access: { isLocked: false },
    }),
  }),
});
```

Declarative access control cannot be used for the `create` operation, as there is no filter being applied when creating an item.
If you use declarative access control with the `create` operation, or with concise syntax, it is equivalent to the static access control definition `true` for create operations.

Declarative access control rules are rarely used directly.
A more common pattern is to return a declarative access control rule from an [imperative](#imperative-list) rule.

### Imperative (list)

Imperative access control rules are functions which return either a boolean value or a [declarative](#declarative-list) value (i.e. a GraphQL `where` clause).
Imperative access control functions can be either synchronous or async.
The function is passed a set of arguments which depends on the operation being performed.
For multi-valued operations the function is only called once, and must evaluate the entire operation as a whole.

If the function returns:

- `false` then an `Access Denied` error will be returned.
- `true` then the operation will be allowed.
- **a declarative value** then this will be applied to the operation as decribed [above](#declarative-list).

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      // Imperative access control definition
      access: args => true,
    }),
  }),
});
```

#### Imperative Function Arguments

Imperative access control functions are passed a collection of arguments which can be used to determine whether the operation is allowed.

| Argument        | Description                                                                                                                                                                                |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `listKey`       | The key of the list being operated on.                                                                                                                                                     |
| `operation`     | The CRUD operation being performed (`'create'`, `'read'`, `'update'`, `'delete'`).                                                                                                         |
| `session`       | The current session object. See the [Sessions API](./session) for details.                                                                                                                 |
| `originalInput` | For `create` and `update` operations, this is the value of `data` passed into the mutation. For `read` and `delete` operations this value is `undefined`.                                  |
| `gqlName`       | The name of the query or mutation being called.                                                                                                                                            |
| `itemId`        | The `id` of the item being updated/deleted in singular `update` and `delete` operations. The `id` of the item being searched for in a single item query. `undefined` for other operations. |
| `itemIds`       | The `ids` of the items being updated/deleted in multiple `update` and `delete` operations. `undefined` for other operations.                                                               |
| `context`       | The [`KeystoneContext`](./context) object of the originating GraphQL operation.                                                                                                            |

> **Important**: When writing imperative access control functions it is essential to consider both singular and multi-value operations.
> If you check the `itemId` in the singular case, then you also need to check the `itemIds` in the multi-value case.
> Similarly, `originalInput` will be different in the singular and multi-valued cases.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      // Imperative access control definition
      access: ({
        listKey,
        operation,
        session,
        originalInput,
        gqlName,
        itemId,
        itemIds,
        context,
      }) => {
        return true;
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

## Field Access Control

Keystone also allows you to set up access control on a per-field basis.
The default access control is to follow the access control rules for the parent list.
Access control is applied to the generated CRU (**c**reate, **r**ead, **u**pdate, but not delete) queries and mutations in the [GraphQL API](./graphql).
Field access control is applied after list access control has been applied.

You can specify access control using either **concise** or **verbose** syntax.
Verbose syntax provides a separate access control rule for each operation type; `create`, `read`, and `update`.
Concise syntax provides a single access control rule which is used for all operation types.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({
          access: {
            // Concise access control definition
            access: true,
            // Verbose access control definition
            access: {
              create: true,
              read: true,
              update: true,
            },
          },
        }),
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

When using verbose syntax, any operation which is not specified will default to `true`.

The examples below will all use the concise syntax, however the various access control rules can all be applied using verbose syntax.

There are two different ways you can specify field access-control rules: **static** and **imperative**.

### Static (field)

Static access control rules are simple boolean values.
A value of `true` indicates that all users can perform the operation.
A value of `false` indicates that no users can perform the operation.

A static value of `false` implies that the operation can never be executed.
As such, Keystone will exclude the field from the related operations and types in the GraphQL API.
For example, if you set `{ update: false }` then the field would not appear in the `ItemUpdateInput` and `ItemsUpdateInputs` types of the GraphQL API.
If you want to keep the fields in the GraphQL API while preventing all access, you can use the [imperative](#imperative-list) access control rule `() => false`.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({
          // Static access control definition
          access: true,
        }),
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

### Imperative (field)

Imperative access control rules are functions which return a boolean value.
Imperative access control functions can be either synchronous or async.
The function is passed a set of arguments which depends on the operation being performed.
For multi-valued operations the function is called once per item, and must evaluate each item being operated on individually.

If the function returns `false` then an `Access Denied` error will be returned.
If the function returns `true` then the operation will be allowed.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({
          // Imperative access control definition
          access: args => true,
        }),
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

#### Imperative Function Arguments

Imperative access control functions are passed a collection of arguments which can be used to determine whether the operation is allowed.

| Argument        | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `listKey`       | The key of the list being operated on.                                                                                                                             |
| `fieldKey`      | The key of the field being operated on.                                                                                                                            |
| `operation`     | The CRU operation being performed (`'create'`, `'read'`, `'update'`).                                                                                              |
| `session`       | The current session object. See the [Sessions API](./session) for details.                                                                                         |
| `originalInput` | For `create` and `update` operations, this is the value of `data` passed into the mutation. For `read` operations this value is `undefined`.                       |
| `gqlName`       | The name of the query or mutation being called.                                                                                                                    |
| `context`       | The [`KeystoneContext`](./context) object of the originating GraphQL operation.                                                                                    |
| `item`          | The item being updated, deleted, or read. This object is an unresolved list item. See the [list item API](./list-items) for more details on unresolved list items. |

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({
          // Imperative access control definition
          access: ({
            listKey,
            fieldKey,
            operation,
            session,
            originalInput,
            gqlName,
            context,
            item,
          }) => {
            return true;
          },
        }),
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

export default ({ children }) => <Markdown>{children}</Markdown>;

Commit message:

Update .sudo() to use the internal schema

docs-next/pages/apis/access-control.mdx, after:

import { Markdown } from '../../components/Page';

# Access Control API

The `access` property of the [list configuration](./schema) and [field configuration](./fields) objects configures who can read, create, update, and delete items in your Keystone system.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({ access: { /* ... */ }, }),
      },
      access: { /* ... */ },
    }),
  }),
});
```

This document covers the complete access control API.
For a guide on how to use this API to apply common patterns please see the [access control guide](../guides/access-control).

## List Access Control

Keystone allows you to set up access control on a per-list basis.
The default access control is to allow all operations for all users.
Access control is applied to the generated CRUD (**c**reate, **r**ead, **u**pdate, **d**elete) queries and mutations in the [GraphQL API](./graphql).
Access control is applied before any [hooks](./hooks) are executed.

You can specify access control using either **concise** or **verbose** syntax.
Verbose syntax provides a separate access control rule for each operation type; `create`, `read`, `update`, and `delete`.
Concise syntax provides a single access control rule which is used for all operation types.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      // Concise access control definition
      access: true,
      // Verbose access control definition
      access: {
        create: true,
        read: true,
        update: true,
        delete: true,
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

When using verbose syntax, any operation which is not specified will default to `true`.

The examples below will all use the concise syntax, however the various access control rules can all be applied using verbose syntax.

There are three different ways you can specify access-control rules: **static**, **declarative**, and **imperative**.

### Static (list)

Static access control rules are simple boolean values.
A value of `true` indicates that all users can perform the operation.
A value of `false` indicates that no users can perform the operation.

A static value of `false` implies that the operation can never be executed.
As such, Keystone will exclude the related operations and types from the GraphQL API.
For example, if you set `{ create: false }` then the mutations `createItem` and `createItems` will be removed from the GraphQL API.
If you want to keep the operations in the GraphQL API while preventing all access, you can use the [imperative](#imperative-list) access control rule `() => false`.
The excluded operations can still be access by using [`context.sudo()`](./context#new-context-creators).

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      // Static access control definition
      access: true,
    }),
  }),
});
```

### Declarative (list)

Declarative access control rules are GraphQL `where` statements which are used as additional filters when looking up items as part of read, update, or delete operations.
The access control rule can be any valid clause which could be applied as a `where` filter to the list in the [GraphQL API](./graphql).

For read operations, the access control rule is merged with any other filters in the query, and only those items which match the merged filter are returned.

For update and delete operations, the access control rule is merged with the `id` value to form a filter.
For singular operations, e.g. `updateItem` or `createItem`, if the merged filter does not return an item then the mutation will return an `Access Denied` error.
For multi-item operations, e.g. `updateItems` or `createItems`, if the merged filter excludes items then these will simply be ignored by the operation, giving the same behaviour as if the ID was missing.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { checkbox } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: { isLocked: checkbox() },
      // Declarative access control definition
      access: { isLocked: false },
    }),
  }),
});
```

Declarative access control cannot be used for the `create` operation, as there is no filter being applied when creating an item.
If you use declarative access control with the `create` operation, or with concise syntax, it is equivalent to the static access control definition `true` for create operations.

Declarative access control rules are rarely used directly.
A more common pattern is to return a declarative access control rule from an [imperative](#imperative-list) rule.

### Imperative (list)

Imperative access control rules are functions which return either a boolean value or a [declarative](#declarative-list) value (i.e. a GraphQL `where` clause).
Imperative access control functions can be either synchronous or async.
The function is passed a set of arguments which depends on the operation being performed.
For multi-valued operations the function is only called once, and must evaluate the entire operation as a whole.

If the function returns:

- `false` then an `Access Denied` error will be returned.
- `true` then the operation will be allowed.
- **a declarative value** then this will be applied to the operation as decribed [above](#declarative-list).

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      // Imperative access control definition
      access: args => true,
    }),
  }),
});
```

#### Imperative Function Arguments

Imperative access control functions are passed a collection of arguments which can be used to determine whether the operation is allowed.

| Argument        | Description                                                                                                                                                                                |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `listKey`       | The key of the list being operated on.                                                                                                                                                     |
| `operation`     | The CRUD operation being performed (`'create'`, `'read'`, `'update'`, `'delete'`).                                                                                                         |
| `session`       | The current session object. See the [Sessions API](./session) for details.                                                                                                                 |
| `originalInput` | For `create` and `update` operations, this is the value of `data` passed into the mutation. For `read` and `delete` operations this value is `undefined`.                                  |
| `gqlName`       | The name of the query or mutation being called.                                                                                                                                            |
| `itemId`        | The `id` of the item being updated/deleted in singular `update` and `delete` operations. The `id` of the item being searched for in a single item query. `undefined` for other operations. |
| `itemIds`       | The `ids` of the items being updated/deleted in multiple `update` and `delete` operations. `undefined` for other operations.                                                               |
| `context`       | The [`KeystoneContext`](./context) object of the originating GraphQL operation.                                                                                                            |

> **Important**: When writing imperative access control functions it is essential to consider both singular and multi-value operations.
> If you check the `itemId` in the singular case, then you also need to check the `itemIds` in the multi-value case.
> Similarly, `originalInput` will be different in the singular and multi-valued cases.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      // Imperative access control definition
      access: ({
        listKey,
        operation,
        session,
        originalInput,
        gqlName,
        itemId,
        itemIds,
        context,
      }) => {
        return true;
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

## Field Access Control

Keystone also allows you to set up access control on a per-field basis.
The default access control is to follow the access control rules for the parent list.
Access control is applied to the generated CRU (**c**reate, **r**ead, **u**pdate, but not delete) queries and mutations in the [GraphQL API](./graphql).
Field access control is applied after list access control has been applied.

You can specify access control using either **concise** or **verbose** syntax.
Verbose syntax provides a separate access control rule for each operation type; `create`, `read`, and `update`.
Concise syntax provides a single access control rule which is used for all operation types.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({
          access: {
            // Concise access control definition
            access: true,
            // Verbose access control definition
            access: {
              create: true,
              read: true,
              update: true,
            },
          },
        }),
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

When using verbose syntax, any operation which is not specified will default to `true`.

The examples below will all use the concise syntax, however the various access control rules can all be applied using verbose syntax.

There are two different ways you can specify field access-control rules: **static** and **imperative**.

### Static (field)

Static access control rules are simple boolean values.
A value of `true` indicates that all users can perform the operation.
A value of `false` indicates that no users can perform the operation.

A static value of `false` implies that the operation can never be executed.
As such, Keystone will exclude the field from the related operations and types in the GraphQL API.
For example, if you set `{ update: false }` then the field would not appear in the `ItemUpdateInput` and `ItemsUpdateInputs` types of the GraphQL API.
If you want to keep the fields in the GraphQL API while preventing all access, you can use the [imperative](#imperative-list) access control rule `() => false`.
The excluded operations can still be access by using [`context.sudo()`](./context#new-context-creators).

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({
          // Static access control definition
          access: true,
        }),
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

### Imperative (field)

Imperative access control rules are functions which return a boolean value.
Imperative access control functions can be either synchronous or async.
The function is passed a set of arguments which depends on the operation being performed.
For multi-valued operations the function is called once per item, and must evaluate each item being operated on individually.

If the function returns `false` then an `Access Denied` error will be returned.
If the function returns `true` then the operation will be allowed.

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({
          // Imperative access control definition
          access: args => true,
        }),
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

#### Imperative Function Arguments

Imperative access control functions are passed a collection of arguments which can be used to determine whether the operation is allowed.

| Argument        | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `listKey`       | The key of the list being operated on.                                                                                                                             |
| `fieldKey`      | The key of the field being operated on.                                                                                                                            |
| `operation`     | The CRU operation being performed (`'create'`, `'read'`, `'update'`).                                                                                              |
| `session`       | The current session object. See the [Sessions API](./session) for details.                                                                                         |
| `originalInput` | For `create` and `update` operations, this is the value of `data` passed into the mutation. For `read` operations this value is `undefined`.                       |
| `gqlName`       | The name of the query or mutation being called.                                                                                                                    |
| `context`       | The [`KeystoneContext`](./context) object of the originating GraphQL operation.                                                                                    |
| `item`          | The item being updated, deleted, or read. This object is an unresolved list item. See the [list item API](./list-items) for more details on unresolved list items. |

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    ListKey: list({
      fields: {
        fieldName: text({
          // Imperative access control definition
          access: ({
            listKey,
            fieldKey,
            operation,
            session,
            originalInput,
            gqlName,
            context,
            item,
          }) => {
            return true;
          },
        }),
      },
    }),
  }),
});
```

export default ({ children }) => <Markdown>{children}</Markdown>;
